Welcome everyone to the series of lectures on outer joins so as I mentioned there's a few different
types of joints.
And one of the subsets of these types of joints are outer joints and there's actually a few different
types of outer joins outer joints essentially allow us to specify how to deal values only present in
one of the tables being joined.
And these are more complex joints than the simpler INNER JOIN which is essentially the default join
where you only grab Rose present in both tables.
So definitely take your time when trying to understand these outer joints especially when we start talking
about left and right outer joins so in these series of lectures we're gonna start by talking about full
outer joints which is the simplest OUTER JOIN and we'll also add in the clarifying where statements
you can add in order to specify what actual rows you want even further and then we'll go into a lot
of detail about the left outer join which is probably the hardest for beginners to grasp and then we'll
also add in clarifying where statements to sub select rows from a left outer join.
Once you understand that we'll just quickly go over right outer join since it's essentially the reverse
of a left outer join.
And if you understand LEFT OUTER JOIN YOU PRETTY MUCH ALREADY UNDERSTAND A right outer join is just
the opposite.
But let's not get too carried away let's begin with the full outer join so let's start with the full
outer join.
Now let's review the two example tables from the previous lecture series on inner joints recall we have
these registrations tables and this log in stable we have people registering for a conference and then
depending on whether or not they showed up or if they registered we have them log in on site here we
have Andrew Bob Charlie and David or ABC these they registered Loggins Andrew and Bob show up they're
present in both tables however we have exhibitor and Yolanda they forgot to register but they still
showed up and logged in anyways.
Ok so we know we would join these tables together on the name column again in this little universe we're
going to assume that the name is unique identifier there's no such thing as to Andrew's or to Bob's
in the world and recall using that inner join that we learned about previously we could match Andrew
and Bob in both tables however keep in mind we have names that only appear in one table and that is
Charlie and David in registrations and exams here and Yolanda in Loggins so let's see how the different
outer joins deal with this particular discrepancy we're first going to take a look at the simplest which
is a full outer join and this actually might be even easier to understand than an inner join so an outer
join or a full outer join just grabs everything so the syntax is select all the columns from table A
do a full outer join of Table B and then on wherever that column match occurs from table A equal to
Table B column match and it's essentially just grab everything whether it's present in both tables or
present only one table.
Notice that it doesn't really matter again if Table B and table a order is switched here because this
is completely symmetrical so because this Venn diagram is symmetrical you can switch off the table order
because you're gonna grab everything anyways so let's take a look at this the actual syntax here be
select all the columns from registrations perform a full outer join on Loggins on registrations that
name equal to Loggins not name so let's actually see how sequel thinks about this in the background
first we're saying grab everything from the registrations table so I don't have to first make this just
font why is a little smaller so we can fit in the results table we're gonna fill in the results table
the way we can think about this we're saying grab everything from registrations and a full outer join
on Loggins so we fill in first everything for registrations.
Again we don't really need to worry whether or not they're in Table B or table Loggins because we're
grabbing everything anyways so we fill in it.
Andrew Bob Charlie and David and then we're doing a full outer join on Loggins so you need to start
filling information for what we actually have a name match.
And we know we have a name match on Andrew and Bob and then we fill it in with the corresponding log
and I.D. in this case it was number two and number four.
Now the issue we arise with is that we didn't have a Charlie or David in Loggins but we're still asking
for everything.
So what sequel ends up automatically doing for us is filling this in with no essentially clarifying
to you that there was no value there present.
So there was no Charlie or David in the Loggins column and since it's a full outer join on Loggins we
also need to fill in the rest of Loggins which was exhibit and Yolanda and then the corresponding Noel
values for the registration table because they were only present in the Loggins table.
So this is what it would look like to do a full outer join on these two tables on the named column.
We grab everything and then fill in for Noel values where we only had a row present in one particular
table.
So this is the easiest outer join to understand because you're essentially just grabbing everything.
Now the next thing I want to quickly discuss is qualifying a full outer join with a where statement
and we can do this in order to get Roe's unique to either table.
In other words rows that are not found in both tables.
Essentially this is the exact opposite of an inner join.
Let me show you why the way this works is we say the following we'll say select everything from table
A with a full outer join on table B on table a column match is equal to Table B dog column Edge.
That's what we had last time and that filled in the entire Venn Diagram including the intersection.
However we're going to add in a where statement to qualify a little further and this is going to add
in the statement where table a the I.D. column is null or table B the idea column is null.
So that essentially means that we're looking for the actual values where one of the tables I.D. columns
null or the other tables idea column is null.
Essentially the opposite of an inner join because this will only grab things that are unique either
completely the table a or unique to Table B.
Keep in mind.
Notice here I could have switched the order from table A to Table B because this is again symmetrical
right down the middle.
So this is actually look like in our example we'll say something like SELECT everything from registrations
a full outer join on Loggins on registrations that name equal to Loggins not name and then we can specify
where registrations that this registration ideas know or where Loggins dot log in is no.
So this is show you how this would actually work.
This is what we have last time.
This is a full outer join.
And notice here we have no values for our registration I.D. and null values for our log I.D..
Technically we could have done the checking of null name as well or we're just gonna use the I.D. column
here.
And what we're going to do here is we'll specify grab them where there's only no values for that.
So look here we're going to add in where registrations that Reg I.D. is though or where log and stop
log ideas no.
Essentially you can think of this as adding an aware statement after you've already done the joint.
So you just further filtering you're going from this full outer join table and then specifying find
me where those I.D. columns are null and that essentially removes those first two rows which was the
match for Andrew and Bob.
And now this is going to show us the results that are unique to only table a or only table B.
We no longer have rows that can be found in both tables.
Essentially the exact opposite of an inner join so let's see a quick example and PGE admin of full outer
joins as well as adding in that qualifier.
Okay here we are at PGA admin.
Let's imagine that some new privacy rules have been implemented and we want to make sure that we don't
have any payment information that's not attached to customer or that we don't have some customer information
that isn't attached to any payments.
Essentially we want to make sure that all the payments we have is associated with the current customer
and all the customers we have are associated with some historical payment.
We don't want to have some customer I.D. information for someone that's actually never purchased anything
in any of our rental stores.
So that's the new privacy update.
We're just kind of imagining the situation.
So what are we actually going to do here.
We can say select everything from payment just to get an idea of what we're working with.
We have again this payment idea and this customer I.D. And I want to make sure that essentially all
the payments here are associated with current customer.
And if I select everything from customer that these unique customers are associated with some sort of
payment I don't want to have any customer here that hasn't actually made a historical payment.
So the what I'm going to do that is also select everything from customer and do a full outer join with
payment.
And just as before we're going to say on we'll say customer that customer I.D. equal to payment dot
customer I.D. So because this is a full outer join that's just gonna take everything and join it together.
So essentially this is every single row found in every single table.
So again it's everything from a customer and everything from payment but recall the new privacy idea
that we wanted to implement was to figure out make sure we don't have any information that's essentially
unique to payment not associated customer or unique to customer or we for some reason have customer
information like their email when they've never done a historical payment.
So that means I want to perform an additional filter with a where statement so I want to check where
on my customer table that customer I.D. happens to be null so we'll say we're customer I.D. is null
we can put them in lowercase or we're payment I.D.
is null all lowercase there.
So what is this actually saying.
It means we're going to fully join the customer table and the payment table where those customer I.D.
join up.
And now I'm going to filter it to attempt to find rows that are either only unique to the customer table
meaning we have information about a customer that's never made a payment or only unique to the payment
table.
Notice here how I'm using the payments I.D. which is a unique identifier for the payment table.
If we keep going over we can see here every single payment has this unique payment I.D. And if I run
this notice I get back empty results which actually means we're in compliance with this new privacy
policy.
We don't have any payment information not associate of some customer.
And we also more importantly don't have any customers email information that their first name or last
name who has never made a payment.
Now what's another way we could confirm this.
Well I could confirm this by taking a look at the distinct customer I.D. in both my customer table and
my payment table.
So this alone basically tells us that there are no rows that are completely unique.
Essentially there are no customer I.D. that are completely unique only to the customer table early to
the payment table.
If we have information on a customer it's because they've done some payment in the past and we're able
to select this with a full outer join and then filtering to make sure that there wasn't anything unique
only to one of those tables and to confirm this just we can wrap our heads around this idea let's go
ahead and just count the distinct customer I.D.
from the payment table so if I run this there is five hundred and ninety nine unique customer I.D. or
distinct customer I.D. in my payment table.
And if I take a look at my customer table refresh this there is also five hundred and ninety nine distinct
customer I.D..
Now technically this doesn't fully answer the previous privacy compliance policy because there could
possibly be different I.D. numbers in different tables.
The truly the real way to answer that previous question to make sure there wasn't any customer information
that didn't have payment information was using that full outer join and then filtering in additional
where with the null statements on those unique identifiers for the customer I.D. and payment I.D. This
technically by itself only further validates that last query we did but doesn't actually fully answer
the question because technically there could have been maybe customer I.D. that were letters and one
table that were five hundred ninety nine unique letters or series of letters.
And then the other table could have five hundred 599 nine unique numbers.
So keep that in mind while this does clarify and verify what we did.
It is a 100 percent confirm that privacy policy.
The only way to do that was using that full outer join of the additional where that we just saw.
So we're learning about really powerful tools here.
And so far we wouldn't have been able to answer those sort of questions without learning about the different
joint capabilities.
OK so coming up next we're going to learn about a left outer join which is typically the join that usually
trips up beginners but we're going to take it slow.
And once you really get the hang of it especially if those Venn diagrams it shouldn't be too bad.
Thanks.
And I'll see you at the next lecture.